# Delta Snapshot 

Delta Snapshot is a Clojure integration library that enables a system of reference (a *subscriber*) to mirror a system of record (a *publisher*) data set via periodic, on-demand requests for deltas generated against the publisher data set. The library consumer hosts an append-only *journal* database (sql or no-sql) that persists each data set and its delta history; the consumer implements a protocol enabling the library to interface with the journal. Delta Snapshot adopts an inversion of the pub-sub pattern where the publisher is passive, the subscriber is active, and communication is synchronous.

## Publishers and Subscribers

A publisher is a system of record that makes full data sets available via a query API. A subscriber is a system of reference that mirrors a publisher data set by making on-demand requests for deltas that have occurred in the publisher data set since the subscriber's previous request.

## Subscription

A subscription represents a subscriber being registered for a specific publisher data set. A subscription also represents a data set that is particular to its subscriber. Even if two subscribers subscribe to an identical publisher data set, there are two distinct data sets, each with a unique data set id and delta history. Every subscription is represented by an instance of the [`SubscriptionConfig`](src/delta_snapshot_clj/subscription.clj) protocol.

*Entity* refers to a row retrieved in a publisher data set. Each entity should have an id accessible by a keyword provided in the [`SubscriptionConfig`](src/delta_snapshot_clj/subscription.clj) protocol. A publisher data set must be a reducible of entity hashmaps. Using records instead of hashmaps is recommended to improve performance.

## Snapshot

A snapshot is the collection of deltas detected between a publisher data set and a subscriber's version of the data set at an instance in time. A snapshot is only generated by subscriber request.

## Deltas

There are three types of deltas.

| Delta  | Meaning                                       |
| -------| ----------------------------------------------|
| Add    | Entity has been added or re-added to data set |
| Modify | Existing data set entity was modified         |
| Remove | Entity was removed from data set              |

## Subscriber Actions

There are three synchronous actions available to a subscriber in `delta-snapshot-clj.io`:

`snapshot!`

Generate a snapshot of all deltas that have occurred since the most recent `snapshot!` or `full!` call, and then return the deltas. If a `snapshot!` or `full!` has never been executed, the full data set will be returned as Adds.

`full!`

Generate a snapshot of all deltas that have occurred since the most recent `snapshot!` or `full!` call, and then return the latest delta for every row in the data set, unless the delta is a Remove. Any Remove deltas just generated are excluded because they are no longer part of the data set.

`retrieve-snapshot`

Retrieve the deltas of any prior snapshot, while not generating a new snapshot. 

### Query Parallelism

Both `snapshot!` and `full!` return a record containing the reducible (IReduceInit) field `:delta-messages-reducible`; `retrieve-snapshot` directly returns a reducible. Each is a foldable of deltas retrieved from the journal. In order to optimize performance, `clojure.core.reducers/foldcat` should be used to retrieve instead of `clojure.core/into`. The former will execute in parallel, and the latter in serial. The parallelization occurs during the internal `clojure.core.reducers/map` used to convert a journal table row record to a message record.

## Journal Table

The consumer hosts a database used by the library. Only one table (with suggested naming *journal*) is required and it will be treated as append-only. The databse may be of any type permitting that the consumer can implement all operations in the [`JournalOperation`](src/delta_snapshot_clj/journal.clj) protocol. A single instance of `JournalOperation` provides for all publisher and subscriber scenarios. 

Examples for a SQL journal database can be found in [`delta-snapshot-clj.journal-sql`](test/delta_snapshot_clj/journal_sql.clj). It is the consumer's responsibility to create queries and index the journal table for query performance.

The journal table requires the following columns/attributes:

| Name                     | Type                      | Description |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------- | --------------------------- |
| subscription-data-set-id | Any                       | Identifies subscription data set |
| snapshot-id              | Any                       | Identifies snapshot; must be unique across all subscription data sets |
| inserted-on-full         | Boolean                   | True if row was inserted during a `full!` operation |
| entity-id                | Any                       | Identifies entity within the publisher data set |
| entity-delta-code        | Char(3)                   | ADD, MOD or RMV |
| entity-delta-inst        | Instant / Timestamp       | Instant when delta was detected against publisher data set |
| entity-cur               | nullable Any (e.g, JSON)  | Current/latest version of complete entity in subscriber system |
| entity-prv               | nullable Any (e.g, JSON)  | Previous version of complete entity in subscriber system |


The three deltas types are persisted in columns in the following manner:

| entity-delta-code | entity-cur                      | entity-prv                   |
| ------------------| ------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| ADD               | added or re-added entity        | null                         |
| MOD               | new version of modified entity  | previous value of entity-cur |
| RMV               | null                            | entity-cur at time of remove |

## Optional Tables

The consumer may opt to maintain an additional *snapshot* table. A row would be inserted before every call to `snapshot!` or `full!`. This table would provide the benefits of tracking snapshots in progress and logging snapshots that generated no deltas. Minimal suggested columns are snapshot-id, subscription-data-set-id, status and timestamp.

## Pub-Sub Data

It is responsibility of the consumer to maintain the many-to-many relationships of publishers and subscribers.